Will the new Nintendo Music app lead to more DMCA takedowns from Nintendo?
Subscription music app gives Nintendo new reason to crack down on third-party music uploads.

Kyle Orland – Oct 31, 2024 10:55 AM |  65

Nintendo would prefer only subscribers have access to its soundtrack collection. Credit: Nintendo

Last night, Nintendo pulled off a surprise launch of a new Nintendo Music smartphone app, offering many of the company's staple soundtrack songs as a perk to Nintendo Switch Online subscribers. But the new subscription freebie could give Nintendo additional motivation to once again crack down on Internet users who have been collecting and posting Nintendo music online for years now.

The Nintendo Music app includes hundreds of songs from titles to download or stream, ranging from 1985's Super Mario Bros. to last year's Pikmin 4. The current music selection is far from comprehensive, but it at least touches on many of Nintendo's most popular series, including Zelda, Pokemon, Kirby, Fire Emblem, Metroid, and Animal Crossing (plus some popular background music from various Wii Channels). Nintendo promises that more tracks will be "added over time," mirroring the process Nintendo has used to add to its Nintendo Switch Online classic game downloads.


A new trailer introduces some of the features of the Nintendo Music app.
Nintendo Music users can build their own playlists, of course, or choose from a number of pre-arranged playlists to suit different moods or character themes. The app also syncs with your Nintendo account to highlight music from games you play and offers options to avoid "spoilers" from certain game music or extend songs in lengthy loops.

The sad fate of GilvaSunner
The launch of the Nintendo music app follows a history of some rather stringent DMCA-fueled takedowns of Nintendo music uploaded to the Internet by others. Back in 2019, for instance, Nintendo famously issued dozens of copyright strikes for Nintendo soundtrack songs posted by popular YouTube channel GilvaSunner, leading to a backlash from fans. By 2022, Nintendo followed up with takedowns for thousands of additional tracks uploaded by GilvaSunner, leading them to conclude that "at this point, it’s really not worth it to keep the channel up any longer."

While GilvaSunner didn't make any money off the ad-free YouTube channel, some observers have noted in the past that "Nintendo itself doesn’t make any money from its soundtracks, either, because there is no official way to pay to listen to them." That's no longer strictly true, as the Nintendo Music app is being sold as a perk to make a paid Nintendo Switch Online subscription a bit more appealing.

The GilvaSunner crackdown directly preceded the launch of the Pokemon DP Sound Library, a small collection of Pokemon Diamond and Pearl music that was briefly available for use in other online content. The launch of the Nintendo Music App could similarly coincide with further DMCA-fueled takedown requests for the many YouTube channels that currently host unedited copies of Nintendo music tracks, including many that have garnered tens of millions of views for reuploads of GilvaSunner's original rips.

Looking for *every single* Metroid soundtrack ever released? We got you covered. Can't say the same for Nintendo's pathetic offering.https://t.co/1grruPGbeW https://t.co/2FBlgyGYLy

— Metroid Database (@MetroidDatabase) October 31, 2024

Still, some Nintendo music uploaders elsewhere on the Internet are remaining proudly defiant in the wake of the new app. The Metroid Database posted on social media about its longstanding collection of "every single Metroid soundtrack ever released" while bad-mouthing "Nintendo's pathetic offering" of only a few Metroid tracks in its app.

Nintendo goes its own way
Nintendo's "Game Content Guidelines" generally allow the use of Nintendo's copyrighted content (including music) "in videos and images that feature your creative input and commentary," such as Let's Play and game reviews. But the guidelines prohibit the straight posting of things like "Nintendo promotional videos, trailers, tournaments, music, gameplay sequences, and art collections... without your own creative or editorial input."

As Nintendo fights to protect its music behind its own subscription service, many other video game publishers—including Microsoft, Sega, Capcom, Electronic Arts, Ubisoft, Valve, Activision Blizzard, and Gearbox—have simply posted official versions of many of their game soundtracks to streaming services like Spotify. Searching for Nintendo music on Spotify, on the other hand, brings up large collections of cover versions from fans looking for easy streaming access to their favorite songs.

Aside from music, Nintendo has a long history of using DMCA takedowns to target everything from emulation tools and hacking videos to fan games and even custom Steam icons.