It's once again that special time of year when we give you a chance to do well by doing good. That's right—it's time for the 2024 edition of our annual Charity Drive!

Every year since 2007, we've encouraged readers to give to Penny Arcade's Child's Play charity, which provides toys and games to kids being treated in hospitals around the world. In recent years, we've added the Electronic Frontier Foundation to our charity push, aiding in their efforts to defend Internet freedom. This year, as always, we're providing some extra incentive for those donations by offering donors a chance to win pieces of our big pile of vendor-provided swag. We can't keep it, and we don't want it clogging up our offices, so it's now yours to win.

This year's swag pile is full of high-value geek goodies. We have dozens of prizes valued at over $4,000 total, including gaming hardware and collectibles, computer accessories, apparel, and more. In 2023, Ars readers raised nearly $40,000 for charity, contributing to a total haul of more than $506,000 since 2007. We want to raise even more this year, and we can do it if readers dig deep.

How it works
Donating is easy. Simply donate to Child's Play using a credit card or PayPal or donate to the EFF using PayPal, credit card, or cryptocurrency. You can also support Child's Play directly by using this Ars Technica campaign page or picking an item from the Amazon wish list of a specific hospital on its donation page. Donate as much or as little as you feel comfortable with—every little bit helps.

Once that's done, it's time to register your entry in our sweepstakes. Just grab a digital copy of your receipt (a forwarded email, a screenshot, or simply a cut-and-paste of the text) and send it to ArsCharityDrive@gmail.com with your name, postal address, daytime telephone number, and email address by 11:59 pm ET Wednesday, January 2, 2025. (One entry per person, and each person can only win up to one prize. US residents only. NO PURCHASE NECESSARY. See Official Rules for more information, including how to enter without making a donation. Also, refer to the Ars Technica privacy policy (https://www.condenast.com/privacy-policy).

We'll then contact the winners and have them choose their prize by January 31, 2025 (choosing takes place in the order the winners are drawn).

The prizes
Here are quick descriptions of some of the biggest, most desirable prizes in this year's lineup. See the next page for a complete list of the available prizes.

Magic: The Gathering prize packs

Wizards of the Coast continues to crank out set after set of news cards in this collectible game that has only gotten more popular since its 1993 debut. This year, we have two packages of decks and booster packs from the Duskmourn: House of Horrors and Foundations sets, each with enough cards to dominate the competition.

UGreen NASync drive enclosures
 


Here at Ars, we've long expounded on the benefits of backing up your data locally on a Network Attached Storage Server. This year, we have two high-end UGreen NASync drive enclosures to jumpstart your own home NAS solution.

Atari 7800+ VIP package

Credit: Kyle Orland
For our review of this no-frills piece of retro gaming hardware, Atari sent us a VIP package complete with the system, two controllers, and a set of eight complete games from its modern cartridge series. The whole package comes in a collectible case that can all be yours if you enter this year's sweepstakes.
Homey Pro


In our review of this smart home automation puck, we called it "best in class" for a certain type of home automation enthusiast who's interested in tweaking it to their particular use case. You can be one of these people if you win this Homey Pro in this year's sweepstakes.

None of the big prizes grabbing your attention? Check out the next page for a full list of prizes you can win by entering!

The prizes
Apparel
Convai t-shirt (Next Level Apparel, black, Medium)
Jaguar Formula E baseball cap and long-sleeve top
Le Remarquable bike helmet (cream)
Parcel Corps branded bicycle cap (Powerhouse Sport)
Resolution Games branded neckerchief
Scout Motors baseball cap + tote bag
VW ID Buzz cap + tie-die dishtowel
Collectibles/other
Balatro Special Edition (Switch)
Bentley keyring
Luxray Funko Pop
Magic the Gathering Duskmourn collection (Play Booster box, collector booster packs x 6, Endless Punishment Commander deck, Death Toll commander deck)
Magic the Gathering Foundations collection (Play booster box, collectors booster x 6)
Nintendo Switch prize pack (Stanley cup + branded pen + reusable vinyl bag + popsocket)
On Your Tail acrylic mini-diorama
Polestar notebook and pen
Tencent QQ Family penguin plush
Tetris Augmented Reality logo pin (Pinfinity)
Zenless Zone Zero media kit (mousepad, fridge magnets, switch game case, acrylic stand, postcards, character badges)
Hardware and accessories
Anker 622 Magnetic Battery (MagGo, blue, used)
Atari 400 Mini
Atari 7800+ VIP package (w/ eight games) (used)
Bellroy Tech Kit (bronze, used)
Crkd Nitro Deck Switch holder (Retro Mint color, used)
Homey Pro + ethernet dongle (used)
Nintendo Alarmo
UGreen NASync DXP2800 (w/ 2 WED Red drives, used)
UGreen NASync DXP480T Plus (no drives included)