The fall of the Berlin Wall in November 1989 was a seminal moment in 20th century history, paving the way for German reunification. Many segments, both large and small, were preserved for posterity—including portions covered in graffiti or murals. A team of Italian scientists used a combination of spectroscopic analysis and machine learning to study paint chips from wall fragments to learn more about the chemistry of the paints and pigments used, according to a new paper published in the Journal of the American Chemical Society,

There has been increased attention in recent years over preserving street art, which is vulnerable both to degradation over time as well as deliberate vandalism. For instance, in 2021, Italian chemists figured out how to use hydrogels to remove added graffiti from vandalized murals in Florence. (Over-painting by vandals is so chemically similar to the original painting underneath that it is difficult to selectively remove just the over-painting without damaging the original.) Unlike most classic masterpieces of the past, created with paints designed to last centuries, street art is more ephemeral in nature, using materials that lack such longevity.

In many cases, like the Berlin Wall, the painters didn't bother to document the specific materials they used, their application techniques, or other useful information that conservators could use to restore or conserve street art.  Modern painting materials are also much more complex, and manufacturers typically do not report specific information on the composition of those materials.

"Each product is a mixture of various components: Pigments and dyes give the color; solvents allow the mixture either to flow through the nozzle of spray or to be spread with a brush," Francesco Armetta of the University of Palermo and co-authors wrote in their paper. "The binders serve to hold the mixture together and allow it to adhere to the surface on which it is spread; emulsifiers, antioxidants, biocides, plasticizers, and other components are added to improve specific properties."

Telltale fragments
Close examination of chips, labeled according to their blue, yellow or red color, that once belonged to art on the Berlin Wall, reveals brushstrokes, multiple layers and the pigments used.
Close examination of chips, labeled according to their blue, yellow or red color, that once belonged to art on the Berlin Wall, reveals brushstrokes, multiple layers and the pigments used. Credit: Adapted from F. Armetta et al., 2024
Nondestructive techniques like Raman spectroscopy are often used to identify the molecular signatures of pigments, dyes, and other chemical compounds, but this usually requires bringing samples to the lab. Handheld Raman devices are used for cases where analysis must be done on-site, but they are far less precise than full-sized laboratory equipment. So Armetta et al. decided to adopt a machine learning approach to enhance the precision and sensitivity of spectral data collected by those handheld devices.

The team collected 15 pictorial fragments of five different colors from Berlin Wall paintings. They used handheld Raman spectroscopy on the paint chips and compared that spectral data to a commercial library of pigment spectra, confirming those findings with X-ray fluorescence and and optical fiber reflectance spectroscopy.

Most of the fragments had two top layers that had been painted with a brush rather than spray paint; brushstrokes were clearly visible under a microscope in several cases. The underlying third layer, in contact with the masonry, was white and probably used to prepare the surface for painting.

Calcium and titanium were the most abundant elements in all the samples. Chromium and lead were present in a green-colored sample, and the authors think this was mixed with another color to get that particular shade. There were also traces of copper in blue and green samples.

Armetta et al. also created their own mock-up samples by mixing commercial German acrylic paints (commonly used since the 1800s) in different ratios to try and match colors and tints from the fragments—crucial information for restoration. This is where their machine learning algorithm (dubbed SAPNet) proved useful. They trained it on the Raman spectral data from the Berlin Wall samples and used it to determine the percentage of pigment. The model concluded that the Berlin Wall paint chips contained titanium white and as much as 75 percent pigment.

"The identification of most of the components of the fragments was only possible through the comprehensive evaluation of the results provided by all the techniques [combined]," the authors concluded, further augmented by the development of SAPNet. "While SAPNet was specifically tailored for pigment mixture analysis, its robust framework demonstrates the transformative potential of deep learning methodologies for Raman spectral analysis across diverse scientific and industrial applications."
